So let's start.
I mean
Just like in the previous
session. In order to figure out
that you have
the full attention to the
slides. Send me, I mean,
uh, emoji icons or feedback
through this Blackboard Collaborate
Ultra, but just yes. Cool.
So.
Other students, so we're waiting for
the other students.
Thank you Natalie. Thank
you, Taylor, Nathan. Anthony.
Ali. Thank you.
So Ravi, Alicia
Cool that's it.
David, so thank you so
much. Abdulwahhab,
you cannot hear me?
So maybe the
problem is with your
speaker or something.
Actually I'm recording this
session, so if you still have
problem with the lecture, you can
watch the recording later, but.
Also, you can ask Sean
to help you.
In the background you
can talk with Sean. Sean may
help you to.
Uh.
To fix your speaker.
So let's start up.
Before we start the
lecture, I just wanted to show
you the discussion board.
So. I highly encourage you to, I
mean, at least look at the
discussion forums here because
you know there are lots of
questions about the lecture, or
about the labs that the other
students already asked.
For instance, for the lab.
As you can see here, regarding
the I mean problems installing
Eclipse or running the
programs. So before you ask a
question or send an email to any
GAs or myself.
Please look at these discussion
boards and see whether the
question is there or not, and
then you can post your
question here and collect bonus
points and the GAs or myself
actually will get back to you
soon in the discussion board. So
I mean the answer to your
question might be helpful for
other students as well.
So for instance, for the
lecture
assignment, as you can see here.
About question 3, question
8 and other questions, so
please do not post
the answers if you have. But
there are others that are
helping. I mean other students
helping to figure out what's the
solution or if you have some, I
mean ambiguity about the answer,
what the answer must look like.
We can take a look at
the discussions in these
Threads in order to help, I mean
to find help.
But please, I mean, please
first look at the
threads and if the question is
not
already posted, just create a new
thread. About the question 3,
we have duplicate threads,
so it's not I mean suggested to
have duplicates, I mean further threads
for one question. So if your
question is not there, then create
a new thread.
And hopefully. Also
about the
Miscellaneous forum is about
anything unrelated to the
lecture or labs. And one
important thing is that,
I already posted some topics in
the lectures. For instance,
there are these topics.
For just discussion. So about
the midterm exam or final
exam, these are good sources
for questions for the exams,
so I encourage you to
look at the discussion. I
mean discussion topics in the
lecture or in the lab, so it
makes be prepared for
the material in the exams.
So. Let's go back to the
slides.
So. We are going
to quickly review what we've
covered last session. We said
that we could represent integer
part in number systems
and also fraction parts in
numbers systems. And then we
said that we can develop the
number system to include
negative numbers. So just make
sure that you can see my.
Yeah, so those were the
last topics in the last
session. We said that
for instance, given in decimal
system, we are given just one position and
we can represent 0 to 9, now we are
going to have a negative numbers
-1, - 2 or -9.
Uh, the solution we gave
was that introducing a
new position, I will put a
sign in that position, minus or
plus, but the thing is,
decimal system doesn't have a
symbol for plus or minus, so
we have to instead of just
putting the. Let me just
again.
Enable the laser points. Yes,
we cannot simply put
this - in a decimal position.
So we have to be said that we
can. Instead of just minus, we
can put one.
Or any non zero values in order
to say that the numbers or
negative and if you put zero it
means that the number is
positive. So any non 0 value is
negative, any positive value
is positive and 0 is positive.
So you can see that 0 to 9 positive
and 0 to 9 negative.
And one problem with this system
is that we have two zeros, minus
and plus zeros. And another
problem with this system is that
the new position, the higher
position which we allocate for
the sign doesn't have this
significance based on the
powers of 10, we just wanted to
show you the sign, so we lose
the highest position for
power of 10.
So. This system is called sign
magnitude and the reason is the
last position, R to the power
of N - 1. If we are given N
position, loses the I mean the
decimal value. And it just
it is just allocated
for the sign. If it is zero, it
means that the number is
positive. If it is non zero it
means that the number is
negative. This is signed
location or position.
And the other locations or
positions are for the magnitude
of the number. That's why we
say this is sign magnitude system.
So in this system, because we
losing the highest position for
the sign, the maximum positive
number is not anymore R to the N -
1 as we did before.
Maximum actually is right now
R to the power (N - 1) - 1,
because, uh, the number of
available position for the
numbers are from zero to N - 2.
So the remaining position for
the magnitude is N - 1.
Instead we can
represent negative numbers and
the minimum number is not zero
anymore. The minimum number is
minus R to the power of N - 1
-1. So basically the
maximum positive number and then
we put this non 0 value in the
same position as the negative one.
So that was the.
Uh, the last topic we covered
in the last session. So in
order to just make sure that
you get the idea. I will post a
poll right now here. So let
me send you a link for this
poll in the chat box.
So, please go to the link and
when you are ready just send me
feedback. I mean, just emoji
icons in the chat box. So we can
make sure that you all see the
poll. And, uh.
In the question, we
ask that. I mean, we can
represent plus 10 and minus 13
in base-10? You want to represent
them in sign magnitude in base-5?
We are
given only four positions.
So just for the
other students, you
have to click
on the link
and then you
will see the
question.
And then if you answer, I mean
the online answers are in the
bottom of the screen.
So we have 61 students
in the class right now so,
I'm waiting for other
students. We have 23
participant or votes so far.
The answer is just, you have been
given four position. You have to
allocate the highest position
for the sun. So you are given
only three position.
So for the signed position, because
plus 10 is positive, so you
have to put zero for the minus
13 because it is negative, you
have to put a non 0 value.
In the base five, the non 0
value could be 1,2,3,4, so we can
use 1,2,3,4 as a negative in this
sign position. And in the other
three position you have to just
simply convert 10 or 13 to the
base five and then put the
converted value there.
So the answer. Let's see
the answer.
Actually, for this question
there are two correct answers,
so the first one most of you
actually put the correct answer, but few
of you also put the
other correct answer. So if
you are given in the exam,
you're supposed to select both
correct answers. So just to make
sure that I mean just to explain
it more. I want
to share my camera.
So the thing is.
Just to explain it more. Plus the
first number is plus 10 in base
10, so we want to convert it to
the base 5
But we are given only.
Four positions.
In a signed magnitude,
we have to allocate
the highest position
for a sign.
Plus 10 is positive, so we just
simply put zero here.
That's it. And in order to
represent the 10, the magnitude
in base five, we just simply have
to convert 10 to base five. We
know that how we can convert a
number in base-10 to base R, R
is 5. So it is, I mean just
repeated division by 5 so it
becomes 2 and the remainder is
0 and then 2 / 5
becomes zero. So when
the remainder is.
What's the reminder?
(NOTE: REMAINDER IS ACTUALLY 2)
2 / 5 is 0.
So then we have to.
So, oh sorry is.
Oh.
What would be?
When you.
10 / 5 becomes 2,
the remainder is
zero and then 2 / 5
becomes zero and
the remainder is
3. Is that
right? (NOTE: REMAINDER IS ACTUALLY 2)
And then, uh.
Let me put the, but
the thing is the.
...
So.
Oh
Am I doing it right? Sorry.
I made a mistake, let me.
Oh, the remainder is.
2 divided by
5, the remainder is gonna be 2.
Divided by 5.
Oh yes, you're right. Yes, the
remainder is still 2 and so
and we then stop when the
quotient is 0 and then we put
the remainder from the reverse
order. So it becomes
2, so it
becomes 2 0 in base five. So
because there are three positions, we
just put zero in the third
position. And 20 here.
So basically 20 is the number in
the base 5, so this is the
correct number. And.
Yes, 2 / 5 is zero and the
remainder is 2.
And regarding the
The minus.
Minus
13.
So again, we are given
four positions. And the first
position is gonna be for the sign
position, so the number is
negative. We can put any non 0
value here so we could put one.
We could put two. We could put
three or we could put four. So
any of these non 0 values are
going to be negative. I mean
indicating negative number in
base 5. So in the answers we
have one and also in the last, I
mean 1 0 and 2 0.
In the options for the
answers, we have two and
then we have to convert 13 to
base five. So we just have to do
it by 13, it becomes two, and the
remainder is 3 and then 2
divided by. Oh my God, let's do it
again. So anyways the number is
gonna be, because we already
converted 10, 13 is 3 units after
10 so becomes 2 3 and then
0. So.
This is the. This is the correct
answer for the
poll. So let's go back to
the slide. We are running out of
time. So. The next
topic is.
Doing.
Let me stop my screen.
Share my screen OK.
The next topic is about how
to do Arithmetic in signed
magnitude. So we want to do I
mean addition, subtraction or
multiplication with division.
But here the number system has
negative numbers. So we
already know how to add when
we have only positive
numbers, but we want to see
how it is possible in signed
magnitude numbering system.
So.
Here are a different
variation of addition and
Subtraction when you are given a
positive and negative numbers in
signed magnitude system.
So in the first one,
let me just again.
Get my laser back, yes.
The first one is,
uh, if you are going
to. Add a positive number with
the positive another positive
numbers, so both numbers are
positive. The result is for
sure, positive, so we just simply
put, the zero in the sign
position. And then we just
normally do the addition.
We already know how to do
that in decimal system.
So last session we did I
mean just addition
when we only
have positive numbers.
About the negative number, there is a
third addition. Add two
negative numbers, so the sign
position is a non 0 value. I put
one. So again, for sure the
result is gonna be negative, so we
just simply put the non 0 value
in the sign position and then we
just add the magnitude of the
two numbers. So again, adding
two negative numbers is normally
adding the magnitude of the
numbers, and in the sign
position, we put one.
The difficulty is when we are
adding a positive number with a
negative number. When we are doing
this addition, this sign
position depends whether X,
the first number is smaller than
the second number or not.
So this is not determined until
the results. So first we do
normal subtraction as we did
last session and then if the
normal subtraction cause a
borrow, last borrow, we have to
apply that borrow in
order to have the correct
answer. And because you have a
last borrow, we know that the
the first number was
smaller than the second number.
So it means that.
The result is negative. So then we put
one here. But if there is, if
there is no last borrow, it
means that X was larger than Y
and so the result is positive.
So we put zero here. So the sign
position depends on whether X is
smaller than Y or not.
And in order to determine this,
we have to see the result. If
the result has a last borrow, it
means that the result is
negative. You put non 0 value in
the sign position. About the
subtraction. So the easiest one
is this. When we are subtracting
a positive number from a
negative number, from math in
high school, we know that minus
multiplied by minus a negative
number becomes positive.
So a positive number
minus a negative number becomes
a positive number.
And so we put a zero in
the sign position and then
we just normally add this
magnitude of two numbers.
For instance, plus 5 - -
10 becomes plus 5 + 10, so
we already knew that from math.
But in Subtraction, there are
two important variations; the
first one is when we are
subtracting 2 positive number,
so the result is not, I mean.
The sign is not determined until
you do this subtraction, so you
do again subtraction.
Try 2 positive numbers and then
if there is no borrow, it means
that the X was larger than Y.
So the sign position is going to be
0. If there is a last borrow, we
applied the last borrow in order
to find the correct answer and
the last borrow shows that X was
smaller than Y so the sign
position is going to be non
zero in order to show that the
result is negative.
The same way we do subtraction
of two negative numbers. So if I
subtract a negative number from
another negative number, the
second negative number becomes
positive. So I mean minus
multiplied by minus becomes
positive. So simply it means
that minus X + Y which is equal
to Y - X.
So we simply do Y - X and wait
until the result. If the result
has last borrow, we apply it in
order to find the correct answer
and it shows that Y was
smaller than X or in another
word, X was larger than Y, so if
that happens, you put non 0
value in order to say that the
result is negative.
In other words, minus X was
larger than minus Y, so the
result is negative.
So these these are the result
of the subtraction, or if this
result of subtraction actually
have a borrow, you can
determine the sign for the
result. So let's practice.
Example one. Imagine we are
going to add two numbers in base
16. So in base-16,
all the numbers are from 012
9 and then ABCDE in
order to represent an 11 up
until 15, so up until F, which
is 15. So the first thing we
have to do is just see that the
last position is for sign,
so it's not involved in the
addition, so we just I mean,
just allocate this for the sign.
And we do a addition for other
positions we have, uh, I mean a
fraction point here.
The next step is doing padding.
When we do padding for the
fraction part, we can add 0 to
the right point doesn't have
any impact, but please be
careful when you do padding in
the left side for the integer
part, do not pad up until you
occupy the sign position,
because when you do padding in
this sign you may change the
sign so you have to do padding up
until the position before
the sign position.
And then we do just addition.
Thing is that because we are
having, we do have two negative
numbers. As you can see in the
sign position we have one. So it
means that the first number is
negative minus X, the second
number has one in the sign
position, so it is negative 2.
So we are doing minus X plus
Minus Y, so this becomes minus
X plus multiplied by negative
number becomes a negative. So it
means that we are
adding two negative numbers.
So this one, so we already know
the result gonna be negative, so
we just put negative here. So
adding two negative numbers
become negative. And
then we do summation.
So when we do the summation so 4
+ 0 becomes 4.
5 + 11 becomes 16 (NOTE: 15 IS A MISTAKE).
16 cannot be represented in a
in base-16, so it is
divided by 16, becomes zero as
the remainder, and one as a carry.
So 1 + 14 becomes 15 + 2 becomes
17, so it becomes one as the
remainder and one unit of 16
in the higher
position. 1 + 10 + 15 becomes
26. 26 is A=10 as the remainder
and one unit as a
carry, and then 1 + 2 become 3
+ B. B is already 11 so it
becomes 14, which is equal to E,
and then we're done with this
edition. So the result is
negative minus this number.
Example 2. Again, here we have,
uh, we are going to do a
summation, but we are going to
do summation for a
positive number and negative
number. Again. As you can see
here the sign position is not
involved in the calculation.
So the first step is padding and
then do the actual calculation.
So the first number is positive,
so plus X you are doing positive
addition plus minus one. The
second number was negative, but
this thing is from math, we
know that this becomes plus, multiplied by a
negative number becomes
negative, so it becomes X - Y
and we don't know the sign of
the results. We have to wait
until we see the result,
whether the result is negative
or positive, and if it is
negative we can determine the
sign. And this depends on
whether X is lower or smaller
than Y or not. And again, this
depends on the last result, so let's do
this. So until the last result,
we don't know the sign of the
result. But the thing is, the
addition becomes Subtraction
because of this plus negative
number, becomes subtraction.
So let's do this subtraction.
If we do this subtraction 4 - 0
becomes four, 5 - B is not
possible. We need to borrow from
the higher position. We borrow 1
unit and it goes to the lower
position as because we are in
the base-16, it adds plus 16.
Plus 16 + 5 - B, which
is 11
becomes 10, which is equal to A
symbol in base-16.
And then the next position minus
one, we already borrowed it, plus 14
becomes 13 - 2 becomes 11. 11 is
equal to B and etc. If you
continue for the last 1. - 1
+ 2 becomes plus 1. Plus 1 -
B is not possible. We need to
borrow. What this borrow comes
from is an imaginary number. We
assume that we have a higher
number that we can borrow from.
So we borrowed one unit and then
do the subtraction. Plus 16 - 1
becomes 15 + 2 becomes 17 - 11
becomes X. So now, because we
have a last borrow, we know that
the first number was smaller
than the second number, so the
result is going to be negative.
So we put simply negative
sign here, which is a
non 0 value, because we are in
the base-16 we could put 123 up
until F, any non 0 value.
And the result is not
correct. We have to figure out
what is the correct result.
So because we have last borrow,
we have to apply the borrow.
So we borrowed from this number
1000 up until here.
So this is going to be
subtracted from that imaginary
number in order to last borrow
and if you do that, 0 from 4 is
not possible, we need to borrow
16. 16 - 4 becomes 12. This is the
result. And etc.
So this is the correct
answer. 94.45C.
And the final correct result is
this. Negative
94.45C.
So this is the result
of adding a positive number
with a negative number, the
addition becomes Subtraction
and tehe sign position is
determined based on the last
part.
So.
In sign magnitude there is a
another event which happens sometimes
which is called overflow. An
overflow means when we
cannot represent the result in
the given position
in the result. So let's see
what happens, when overflow
happens in sign magnitude base
R. The only
possibility of overflow is when
we do summation and the result
cannot be represented in the
given positions. So as the name
says overflow, it means that the
result cannot be represented by
the given position. We need more
positions, and the only instance
that this happens is when we do
summation or addition.
For instance, adding two
positive numbers. Again the
result is gonna be positive but
because the result of this
edition is large. Very large,
cannot represent it. So the
last carry, it
produces a carry. The last
carry
goes to the sign position and
makes it negative. So this is
the overflow event.
For adding a positive number
and a negative number the
results, because it ends
with the subtraction, the
result going to be smaller,
so there's no last carry.
And the sign it depends on
the borrower.
Again, adding two negative
numbers the result is going to be
negative, but if we add magnitudes, the
result is a larger number, the
carry goes to the sign position
and makes it positive. So this
is another instance of overflow.
In subtraction, one variation actually
may cause overflow and this is
the subtraction of a positive
number and negative number
because I mean minus negative
number becomes positive. So you
actually are doing addition, so
the addition may
result in a large number and
produce a last carry, and that
carry goes to the sign
position and makes it negative.
So this is another instance of
overflow, let's practice.
So imagine we are given these
two numbers. The first number is
positive. As you can see here.
So this is we are in the base-2.
We are doing a subtraction
in base-2. The first
number is positive. As you
can see here, positive 27.
This number in base-2.
And we are going to subtract
this number, which is a negative
number from this, plus 27.
So the second number is negative
because the sign position is non
zero. And in base-2, nonzero
means only one and the other
numbers is the magnitude, so the
magnitude is 14, sign position is
minus 14 and again the sign
is not involved in the
calculation. So here we have
an instance of a positive
number minus a
negative number. So these two
I mean minus negative number
becomes positive.
So in other words we are doing
addition. And the result
going to be positive.
So, plus X - - Y becomes plus
X + Y and it is +
X added by Y.
So. The minus
Y becomes a positive number, so we
have to make it the 2nd
negative number positive. So we
have to change the sign position
from one to zero, make it
positive and then we have to
change the subtraction to
addition. So this becomes, these
two changes must happen.
Then we are good to go with the
addition so when we do the
addition because, uh, we are
adding two
positive number the result is going
to be positive so the sign
position is 0 and then we start
adding the other positions, so
when we start adding the other
positions, 1 + 0 becomes one. 1
+ 1 becomes 2, Two is 0 with a
remainder. And then we carry them here so
if you continue this way.
Here's the result. So 1. 1 + 1 = 2. 0
comes here. Carry 1 + 0
+ 1 becomes 2. 0 as
carry. 1 + 1 + 1 becomes 3, three
has the remainder 1
and we carry here, and 1 + 1 = two
plus 0 = 2. 2 has zero and a carry.
But this carry goes to the
position that we have the sign.
So this is, uh, so we have
to decide. If we just, uh,
store, last carry, if you
consider the last carry, it
goes to the sign position and
makes it negative, the result
becomes negative.
And this is not true because
the result is going to be positive.
If we just ignore the carry. We
said that this is all going to
be positive, so we keep the zero
as the sign and just ignore the
carry, the last carry.
We see that the result is not
correct. The result is plus 9,
which is not true.
So this is an instance of
overflow in signed magnitude
when we have a last borrow and
we simply said the
overflow happens and do not look
at the result. The result is not
reliable. And this is a,
uh, an instance of overflow in sign
magnitude base-2.
So before starting, the
new topic, is there any
questions Sean?
Oh yeah, um, instead of
using the minus symbol,
wait, wrong question.
I
don't think there is one.
OK, cool. So let's
continue with. The new topic.
Signed compliment.
Uh, as you can see in
the sign magnitude, uh?
In the sign magnitude, if you
are given N positions in base R,
we have to allocate the highest
position as the sign.
So, uh, the highest position
doesn't have the value anymore,
so it just shows this sign. So
0 for positive number and non 0 for
negative numbers. But the thing
is there are some, I
mean problem with this sign
magnitude. First of all we have
two zeros. 2nd,
although we have negative
numbers, we are wasting a lot of
possibilities. We already knew
that the range of numbers. If we
assume the highest position as a
positive number. I mean if you are
in normal number system
without sign magnitude, the
highest number is R to the power
of N - 1.
We give up one position. The
higher position for the sign, so
we reduce the maximum positive
number to this number, R to the
power of N - 1 - 1. But instead
we are going to have negative
numbers. But there are
other ways here.
So we're just splitting the
range of numbers for the
positive and negative numbers,
but there are some possibilities
in the range of numbers that we
are not able to use it.
And for instance.
For base-10 we could use
1234 just to show the
sign of the negative number, but
all are representing one single
number, for instance.
Plus, minus nine can represented
by here one nine or two nine or
three nine. So all these I mean
different available. I mean
different numbers representing
just one number, minus nine, so
we are wasting other, I mean
numbers for representing one
single number. In the lecture
assignment for the next week.
This is going to be another
question. What are the ways
in sign magnitude in base R.
In order to improve the sign
magnitude. Just to have
negative numbers without wasting
the possibility for the
numbers. There is another system called
signed compliment. In order to
know what is sign complements,
we have to introduce 2 new
topics. The first one is this,
diminished radix complement.
What is this? Diminished radix
complement is by definition
this. If you are given a number
N in base R with N digits.
The diminished radix complement,
this number, or R minus one's
complements. Is this.
If you subtract a number from
this number, R to the power of N
- 1. You already know that R
- R to the power of N -
1 is the maximum number given N
positions. So basically
diminished radix complement
complement says that you have to
subtract the your number N from
the maximum number given the Nth
position and the result is
called diminished radix
complement for that number. So
let's practice. If you are
in base-2, R - 1 becomes
one, so the one's complement
of base-2 is this.
If you are given any number,
first we have to see what's the
maximum number for that, given
the positions we are given
12345, we are given 5 positions,
so the maximum number for the
five position is 2 to the power
of 5 - 1, two to the power
of five is 1 in another new
position and all leading 0s
in other positions.
Minus one.
Here is 1. Given five
position, if we do the
subtraction. As we already knew,
I mean just zero minus 1 is not
possible. We need to borrow an
etc. It becomes the maximum
number given five positions. We
already knew that, so we put the
largest digit in all positions.
So 5 digits of one is
the maximum number
given five positions.
And then if you are going to
calculate the ones complement
of any binary number
given five positions, we have to
just subtract that number from
this maximum number. So if you
are given 10101 as our number,
the one's complement of this
number is just subtracting this
number, from the maximum number
11111. Or if you do this
subtraction 1 - 1 becomes 0.
1 - 0 becomes one. 1 - 1 = zero.
1 - 0 = one. 1 - 1 becomes 0.
So this is the 1's compliment
of our number.
As you see here.
When you are subtracting a
binary number from the maximum
binary number, it means that you
are simply not seeing each
digit. You are just reversing
or noting any digits, uh,
when you do one's complement.
So this is our number 10101.
If you calculate the ones
complement of this number, it
becomes, you know, not one
becomes 0, not 0 become one,
not one becomes 0. So applying
not operator in each digit
actually produces the one's
complement of any binary
number.
How about the other bases? If
your base-4?
The R is equal to four. R minux
one becomes 3, so 3's
complement is the diminished
complement of a number in base
4. So again, if I give you 5
positions from 4 to the power of
0 to 4 to the power of 4, four
to the power of.
How many positios? 5. Four to the
power of five is 1 in the higher
new position and all
zeroes in other positions.
Minus one. Becomes the maximum
number in base-4 when you are
given 5 positions. So basically
repeating the largest digit in
all positions 33333. So 5 digits
of three is the maximum number
given five positions.
And the three's compliment of any
number in base-4 is just
simply. Uh, subtracting your
number from that maximum number.
So basically it means that each
digit subtracted from the
largest digits. So 3 - 0 becomes
three, 3 - 3 becomes zero and if
you are given this number 12130.
So you have to simply just
subtract each digit from the
largest digit.
This is the three's complement
of any number in base-4.
In base-10, R minus one becomes
nine, so the 9's compliment of
any number in decimal system or
base-10 is just subtracting each
digit from 9. So this is the
largest number given five
positions repeating the largest
digit 9 in all positions.
And then this is the 9's
compliment of any number. If
you're given this number 12130
as a decimal number, the 9's
compliment of this number is
just simply subtracting each
digit from 9, so 0 subtracted
from 9. 9. 3 subtracted from 9,
six and etc.
So R - 1's
complement of number in base R
is equal to just subtracting
each digit of your number.
From the largest digit, the
largest digit is R - 1.
That's that's called diminished
radix complement, complement of
any number or R - 1's
complement of any number.
Any questions?
No questions so far.
OK, so when we have diminished
radix complement we could have
radix complement diminished radix
Compliment is just R to the
power of N - 1 minus your
number. But the radix complement
doesn't have that minus one. So
basically by definition the R's
complements of number or
radix complements of a
number is is.
Equal to this number, you just
simply subtract your number from
the r. The power of N.
So equivalently, the radix
complement is equal to
diminished radix complement plus
one, because in the diminished
radix we did this r type of
N - 1 minus your number.
And we just simply if we just
simply add this one unit it
becoms this plus one and this
minus one actually can be
removed and then it becomes r
to the power of N - N.
This small N is the number of
positions or number of digits
the capital N is your number.
So you can see that the
diminished radix complemented just
one unit is lower one unit lower
than the radix complement.
So let's do a practice.
Princess in base-2. The Two's
complement is equal to this.
Not ing, each digit.
And then adding one unit. So if
you are given this number 10101.
You have to 1st apply the one's
complement which is doing the
not operator, so it becomes
01010. Just Not ing on each
digit and then adding this
number with one unit. So if you
add with one unit it becomes 0 +
1 one one plus 01001101 and
etc. So the Two's complement of
any binary number is equal to
1's, complements plus one.
Which is Not ing each digit.
Adding one unit.
In base for the 4th, complement
is just doing the 3's complement
plus one. So if you are
giving this number 12130,
applying the 3's compliment
meaning that each digit minus
largest digit. Here is the
result. And then adding one
unit. So adding one unit.
Times 3 + 1 becomes 4 running
base-4 is not possible to put
four, SO 4 / 4 becomes 0. And
a Carry Carry comes here 1 + 0
becomes one. And then again.
Uh.
Yes, and then 2 + 0 two 1
+ 0, one 2 + 0 two. So
this is the 4th complements
of this number.
In base-10 we have 10's
complement, so we just simply
apply 9's  complements plus
one. So if you are given
12130 in base-10, you have to
simply subtract each digit from
the largest digit in order to
apply nine's complements. This is
the nine's compliment.
And then you have to just simply
add 1 unit. So 1 + 9 + 1
becomes 1010 is zero and a carry.
And then Carry comes here 1 + 6
+ 0 becomes seven, 8 + 0 becomes
eight, 7 + 0 becomes 7 and etc.
And in general, the r's
complement of base R is
equal to R minus ones
complement plus one unit.
Any questions?
So seems there is no questions,
so why we introduced the the
diminished radix and Radix?
The diminished radix actually
introduced in order to help us
with the radix complements and
whenever we are going to
calculate the radix complement,
we apply the diminished radix
first plus one unit and what's
the use of the radix complement?
The radix complement helps us in
order to create a new number
system. With a negative numbers
without any waste.
The new system is called
signed compliment, so we
already had signed magnitude
for representing negative and
positive numbers. Here we
have another new system
called signed compliment.
So let's see what is sign
complement system. Sign
complement system says that in
order to avoid any ways for the
positions. Imagine you are given
at first positive numbers 01 up
until 9. Just one position for
the decimal system. Now we want
to represent negative numbers
without waste. So in order to
add a new number without
any waste, there is no other
choice than just giving up a
positive number. So we just get
rid of a positive number in
order to represent a negative
number. We could say that we can
get rid of plus one.
Anne, instead having minus one.
So then you don't have plus one
anymore. You could say that I
can get rid of +5.
And give the position for 5 + 5
to minus one. So then you
don't have anymore plus five,
but is there still? Instead
you have minus one.
But what happens if I start from
the largest positive number?
So if I give up #9 and
give the position from 9
or the the possibility
to represent nine to - 1.
This is, uh, interesting
becausw. The relationship
between 9 and 1 is.
Based on the ten's compliments.
We can say that if we are
giving up the representation for
positive 9. We can give you
a availability to the 10's
complement of nine.
As the negative number, so minus
one reply is replacing 9.
And the relationship is the 10s
complement of nine is 1.
And that 10's
complemented one is 9.
So the radix complement of these
numbers actually leads to
another number. So let's
continue this way.
If we give up the
representation for eight and
give the representation to minus
two so we don't have 8 anymore,
but instead we have minus two
without any waste, and their
relationship between 8 and
2 is ten's complements. So if
you do 10's complement of eight
is simply says that nine's
compliment 8 which is 8 - 9 + 1
unit. So it becomes two and then
minus 2. So if we apply 10s
complement on two, it becomes 8.
If you continue this way, seven
for - 3 six for - 4.
Five,for - 5 and we can continue
up until four for - 6, three, for
- 7 an adventure.
And we can go to the next
position for the last position
giving up. One for - 9. So
then we end up with two systems,
one system which has only
positive numbers. And if we give
up the positive numbers for
negative numbers by applying
ten's complements, we have a
range of numbers, all negative.
Just given one position
so there is no waste.
So we have to select whether
we are going to represent only
positive numbers or whether we
are going to represent only
negative numbers.
This this thing is this.
We can have both positive
numbers and negative numbers.
Uh, splitting the range of
availabilities for the negative
and positive numbers, we can say
that the first half of the
numbers is positive, so we keep
them intact without any change.
But for the other half of the
numbers range of numbers we
apply ten's complements in order
to represent negative numbers.
So when we do that.
We see this new system is still.
We only have one position with
the one position will start from
zero 01234. So we have positive
numbers from zero to four.
And then when we go from four to
five, there is no positive for
Big 5 because we give up the
position for five to the 10s
complement of 5 - 5. So whenever
we see five, we do not interpret
it as positive five. We
separated as ten's complements
of five which is minus 5.
Whenever we go to the six, you
say that we don't have six
anymore. We see six, but we
interpret it as a negative
number and the negative number
is the 10s complement of that
number to the.
10s complement of six is 4, so
we interpreted as minus 4.
The next unit is 7. We say that
we see seven, but we don't have
7 anymore. Be interpreted.
Interpret seven as 10s
complement of seven. So the 10s
complement of seven is 3, so
minus three. This way, without
any ways we have positive
numbers and negative numbers for
the negative numbers, although
we represent them as a positive
numbers. But we.
Interpret them as
negative numbers.
So this way we have a
signed ten's complements
in base-10.
So. Basically, when we are in
the base-10's signed compliment
or signed radix complement of
base-10, is this.
We say we just have the range of
numbers. If you are given n
position from 10 to the power of
0 up until 10 to the power minus
one. You just split the range of
numbers the first half are
positive numbers from zero.
To the, first half, so the
maximum number 10 to the power
of N - 1, the maximum number
divided by two. So the first
half all the numbers are
positive, so nothing to do.
And again, comparing the sign
magnitude, the highest position
is still have value.
In sign magnitude we give up the
value. We just say that that
position just shows these sign.
But here in the sign radix
complements we still use. We are
still using the last position.
How about? It's second half of
the numbers. The second half
range of numbers.
So if this starts from this.
To the last number, the maximum
number. Although we see positive
numbers, we interpret them as
negative numbers and in order to find
what is the actual negative
numbers, we apply.
10s complement? So if we are
giving a number within the range
of, I mean is larger than the
half and the lower or equal than
the maximum number in base-10.
You say that although we see a
positive number, but that's a
negative number, and in order to
find the negative number we
apply ten's complements on top
of the number we see.
So let's practice. Imagine you
are given this number in base
10. And we are set that we are
in the signed radix complement
base-10. So it's already said that
we are in the signed radix
complement. So if we are in a
signed magnitude, we could. We
are set that we are in the
signed magnitude base-10. But now
we are inside the radix
complement. It means that we are
representing negative number
based on the radix complementary
are in base-10 based on the 10s
complement. So imagine we have
we are given this number 5805074
which is equal to.
5 million 800.
5074 So first of
all, how many positions
have seven positions from
10 to the power of 0 to 10
to the power of 6
What's the? Maximum number the
maximum number is 10 to the
power of 7 - 1.
So this is equal to
999999 OK? Divided by two.
So all the numbers within
the zero and this number
is positive. An if number
is larger than this
number, it is negative.
So let's calculate that.
So if we divide this number 10
to the power of , 7 - 1
becomes the largest number given
an position 7 positions or 999.
Divided by two becomes four and
all the positions 9.
And if you look at this number,
this number is.
Is larger than the half the
first half of the numbers, so we
said that this number is not the
correct number or is not a
positive number, is it? This is
a negative number an in order to
see that this number, although
we see a positive number. But
this is not a positive number,
so we in order to see what is
the negative number, we have to
find the 10s complement to
figure out what is the negative
number. So if you apply the
ten's complements on top of this
number. So basically means that,
uh, subtracting each digit from
9 + 1.
So nine complements plus one
and this this is although we
see 5,000,000 something. But
this is not the correct
number. The number is
negative. 4 million something.
So this new system is called.
10s complements signed
ten's complementing base.
So on the other hand, if you are
asked to represent and negative
number in 10s complement based
tab. So there we have to do
the reverse procedure, so we are
giving a negative number.
So we have to not simply
represent a negative number in
base-10. Are all the negative
numbers must represented as
positive numbers? So we have to
figure out what is the positive
complement of this negative
number. or the reverse is again
the 10s complement, so we apply
the ten's complemented on the
number. So in order to find that
the ten's complements of this
number is just simply
subtracting each digit from 9
Or nine's compliment plus one unit.
So if we do that we end up with
this number. 6 million
something. So in order to
represent minus 3 million
something, we have to represent
it as this number.
So the correct is this 6
million 549 thousand something.
But this is just a
representation. The actual value
is minus 3,000,000 something.
So let's practice in another
base, base-16.
In base-16, if you are going
to represent negative numbers
and the system is.
Assumed to be 16 signed 16's
complements. So.
If you are given this number,
for instance. Uh, one
BF2B4 As again in sign magnitude
we have signed position but
in sign complemented we don't
have any sign position.
So first of all we have to see
that this number is a negative
or positive number. Although we
see a positive number, but it
might be interpreted as negative
number. So in order to figure
that we have to see what is the
first half of the numbers and
the second half of the numbers.
So we are given how many
positions?
123456 so we are given 6
positions, so the first half the
positions are the maximum number
divided by two, so 16 to the
power of 6 - 1 / 2 which
is equal to this number.
But in 16 in the base-16 is
this. So you can see that the
first is easily to figure out
without any further calculation
what is the first, the maximum
half first half of the numbers.
So you have to simply. What
is the maximum number FFFFF?
So if you divide it by two,
the highest position
actually become divided by
two only. So the first half
is the Max, first half is 7,
and in all other positions F.
So then the next step is
comparing the given number and
this first half.
So because this given number is
smaller than this number, the
number is positive.
So we interpret we see this
number and we interpret it as
positive. So the number is
positive one BF2B4.
And there is no need
for any sign position.
How about this number?
I just changed the highest
position to eat, so E BF2B four
in base-16.
What is the number? Is it
positive or negative? Again, we
have to compare this number with
the first half.
So we are given and six
positions.
With the sixth position, the
maximum number divided by two is
equal to 7 FFFFF.
And this number.
Uh is lower or larger than this
number. As you can see, Uh E.
Is much is a larger digit 7,
so this given number is larger
than this number the first half.
So the number is negative,
although we see this number, but
this is not the number. We have
to interpret it as a negative
number, so how can I interpret
this as a negative number?
We just apply the radix
complement. We are in the base
16. We have to apply 16's
complement. So this extends
complements of this number.
Is equal to radix diminished
radix complement, which is 15
complements plus one.
So basically it means that each
digit minus the largest digit,
so each digit minus the largest
digit which is F.
So 4 - F becomes B, B
- F becomes four and etc plus
one. So this is the number.
Although we see EB F2B4.
We are interpreting this as
minus one 40D4C.
The reverse, if you are given
minus 140D4C in base-16 and
we are going to represent it in
base-16 given 6 positions.
So again, there is no sign
position because we are given
minus negative number and we are
assumed to be in signed
complement system. So we have to
figure out what is the positive
complement of this negative
number. So we simply apply the
radix complement or 16's
component which is simply equal
to subtracting each digit from
the largest digit.
Diminished radix complement plus
one becomes radix complement.
So the number becomes EBF2B4
, so whenever you are
asked to represent minus one,
40D4C, you have to.
Represented as E BF2B4.
So this is the number.
So basically inside r's
complements in any base r
system. So again, we are in. We
started with base R, we only had
integer part for negative
numbers and then we add the
fraction part in base R and then
we said we can have negative
numbers. We introduce sign
magnitude in base. R said that
sign magnitude actually have a
has a waste because it allocates
higher position at the sign just
for sign. Uh, an has a waste.
Then we said that we can have
signed complement system a
better system to represent
negative numbers. For doing that
we apply radix complement for
doing radix complement. We apply
the diminished radix compliment
plus one. So that's the fault.
An at the end we have a I
mean complete number system
which is called signed R's
complements in base r.
Are so in this system we have
negative numbers, positive
numbers, fraction numbers, but
the negative numbers is
represented as signed radix
complement. So
let's. C for in
general term. So if you are
given n position.
Uh, in base r  the first
half is represented as a
positive number R to the power
of N - 1 / 2.
Which is basically equal
to this number.
Are the largest number.
The largest position divided by
two an all the other positions,
the largest digit.
For instance, base-2, the
first half, the maximum half is
end with this number.
Zero so 2 / 2 - 1 /
2 which is equal to 1 / 2
equal to zero and all positions
one. So if you see a number less
than this number, that's a
positive number. If you see a
number more than this number is,
that's a negative number in base
to. The interesting thing is
that in base-2, it means that
if the higher position is.
One, it means that that number
is negative. An interesting
thing is that in base-2, the
signed complement system acts
like sign magnitude.
But only in base-2 IN base-4
it means that the first half is
4 - 1 becomes 3, / 4 becomes
one, and in all other positions
the by the largest digit. So
this is the first half.
Base 8 8 - 1 /
2 three and then all the largest
digits in all other positions.
So if the numbers in base in
these bases are lower than
these numbers, it means that
the number is negative.
However, if you see a number
larger than that number, which
means that just the these
numbers plus one.
numbers plus one becomes in base
2 one and all zero. If the
number is equal to this number
or larger, it means that that's
a negative number. In base-4,
it means that this number, the.
This number +1 if you add 1 unit
to this number, it becomes this.
Two all leading 0.
if a number is equal to
this one or larger than this
one. The number is negative
and the same in other bases.
And
I.
In the same way, inside my
complements we can do the
arithmetic.
Uh.
So I
guess. In the sign
magnitude in the sign
complements, the arithmetic is
very simple and that's the
beauty of this system. There's
no other. I mean variations when
you do addition, you simply add
2 number regardless of the
number of positive or negative.
When you do subtraction.
You can convert the subtraction
based on the complement of
the number, so the Subtraction
becomes addition, but addition
with the. Uh, sign complements
of the number, because minus
number becomes a negative
number, so you simply in order
to have a negative number, you
apply this radix complement on
that number, and if the result
of these two edition have a
carry, you just simply for that.
So the addition and Subtraction
becomes addition, just just one
operator for both arithmetic.
But for the subtraction you have
to do addition with the radix
complement of the number.
So here at example
for the addition.
Imagine you are given a number
two number  in base-2. First of
all, you do the pattern for the
first number. You have to see
the number is negative or
positive, but in in this sign
compliment arithmetic there is no
need for that. You just simply
add 2 numbers. But just for
hint, the first number is
positive. Uh, because the first
number is negative because the
number is. Greater than this
half. You are given 6 positions.
This number is larger than this
number, so do not. The first
number is negative. And the
negative number is 2's
complement of the numbers, so
this is the negative actual
negative numbers. So the first
number you don't do anything but
just in order to see what's the
number that's number is
negative, so minus 21.
The second number.
After applying padding because
it's lower than the first half
number, so that's a positive
number. So again, in the sign
compliment, we don't pay
attention whether the number is
positive or negative. This is
this calculation, just for own
hint. We just simply do the
ads. So the addition so 1011
plus 1 0 an, etc. This is the
last number in order to see the
last number is a correct number.
We can see that the number is
larger than the first half, so
the largest negative. And what's
the negative number you have to
apply the two's complements, and
this is the negative number
minus this. And this is equal to
minus seven, so it means that
the calculation was right.
For the subtraction, as I
said, for the Subtraction,
again you have to convert
the subtraction to.
Addition so minus.
In positive number makes the
number negative, so you have to
simply make the second number
negative. So. You have to
apply the. Make the second
number negative. In order to
make it negative, you have to
simply apply the two's
compliment. We are in base-2.
So plus 8.
Becomes minus 8 by this
representation. So this is
the minus 8.
And then you have to change it
with addition. So, minus plus
eight becomes plus and negative
8, so the negative 8 is equal to
this number. Then
do normal addition.
So it produces a last Carry
and then before the last just
simply ignore that.
And here is the result.
So in the sign complement system
you just simply add 2 numbers.
If you have a subtraction you
added with the task element of
the number and then you end up
with the result.
And as you can see here, the
result you have to see whether
the result is a positive or
negative. We have to compare it
with the first time. The
first half is this. This
number is greater than this,
so this is a negative number,
so minus this number.
Although this is a correct
answer, but this is a negative
number and the negative number
is this. Minus 29 this is so we
don't change the result.
And in signed complements are.
We are given a.
We can have overflow.
Uh and the overflow happens
again, 'cause we are not in sign
magnitude, so we don't have
signed position. We are given
just the I mean position and
positions. In sign complement
system. The overflow happens
when you add two negative
numbers. And the result is
positive. Or you add two
positive numbers and the result
is negative. So the overflow
signed compliment depends on the
result. Have to interpret
their result if the result is
positive and the first 2
numbers are negative, it
means that overflow happens.
Let's have a practice In a
for the same number. Imagine we
are given the same number. This
minus 21. And this one.
Doctor fani it's 9:57. Oh OK, OK
so we can we can cover this
topic next. A session overflow,
but I put the slides in the in
the black board you can see what
is what when an overflow
happens in sign complement
system. For instance, in base
two week and will cover this
again in the next session too.
So I'll be in the office
hour for your questions.
Oh, I mean in the office
hours, so thank you so
much for your attention.